Add Piano Workshop (#1326)
hackclub/hackclub: workshops/tunes/README.md

---
name: Tunes on JS
description: Make a piano for your web browser with Tone.js
author: '@sampoder'
---
# Tunes on JS - Creating a Piano

> We've all mashed our fingers on a piano, thinking we're creating some thing amazing (of course you are!). Ok, maybe that's just me. Today, I though I'd be cool if we created a piano using HTML & JS all with the help of a great libary called [Tone.js](http://tonejs.github.io/)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've all mashed our fingers on a piano, thinking we're creating something amazing (of course you are!). Ok, maybe that's just me. Today, I though I'd be cool if we created a piano using HTML & JS all with the help of a great libary called [Tone.js](http://tonejs.github.io/)!
```

```css
body{
  width: 75vw;
  margin: auto;
}

#piano{
  height: 400px;
}

.key{
  height: 400px;
  width: 14.2857142857%;
  float: left;
  border: 5px solid black;
  border-right: none;
  background: white;
  text-align: center;
  padding-top: 300px;
}

#B{
  border-right: 5px solid black;
}
```

Firstly, the `body` tag is set to have a width and centered using `margin: auto;`. Secondly, we set the `#piano` div to have a height of 400px. As there is very little content in the keys, this will make sure they are big and look realistic. Next we make each key have the correct height, have a width of one seventh of the div, it has a border and a background of white. Lastly, the B key will have a right border as it comes at the end.

I hope you understand the starter, now you may be getting bored so let's get making!

# Detecting a key press

To play a note in our project we will have the user press a key on their keyboard. Javascript has an event for this: `document.onkeydown`. This is fired when ever a key is pressed down.

For example, in the below snippet:

```javascript
document.onkeydown = function(e){

> 	console.log('Key pressed!')

Reviewer: Indentation should be the same as repl.it's so please make it 2 spaces everywhere.

}
```

> Whenever a key is pressed it will log 'Key pressed!'. You can try it too! Just type this into you `script.js` file, click 'Run', then click the browser preview and press a key. You should see the logs in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever a key is pressed it will log 'Key pressed!'. You can try it too! Just type this into your `script.js` file, click 'Run', then click the browser preview and press a key. You should see the logs in the console.
```

The next step is knowing what key we pressed, we want to get a bit more info to do that. We can do this with the following snippet. The snippet gets all the information from the event that fired the function.

> ```javascript

Reviewer: Maybe add a more elaborate explanation for this code snippet as it seems something new for beginners!

<img src="https://cloud-7ownn8t7c.vercel.app/screenshot_2020-09-17_at_7.14.26_pm.png" width="380" alt="keycode.info's UI">

Now that we know how to identify the key, let's only log the event if it is the `s` key. It's keycode is `83` We'll use an if/else statement for this.

```javascript
document.onkeydown = function(e){
  e = e || window.event;
  var key = e.which || e.keyCode;
  if(key===83){console.log('S had been pressed')}
}
```

We've done it!

## Playing a sound

Now it's time to play a sound with Tone.js! First let's start up Tone.js, add the following to the top of the Javascript file:

```javascript
Tone.start();
const synth = new Tone.Synth().toDestination();
```

This starts up Tone.js and then creates a synth for us to play a note. 

We're going to do this in a Javascript function, to make our clean. 

```javascript
function playNote(note) {
	synth.triggerAttackRelease('C4', "8n");
}
```

Here's how we create a function. The name of our function will be `playNote` and it will need a variable called `note` to be provided when the function is called. Then inside of that function, it plays the C4 key for the duration of 8 notes. 

> However, we aren't using our `note` variable. Let's use this. We're going to add it in using template strings. Template strings allow us to add variables into our strings. To do this we use the <code>`</code> character instead of  <code>'</code>. 

Reviewer: I think 'template literals' will be a better word here.

Author: imo template strings is better as string is a word they'll be more familiar with

Author: like a literal, what's that?

Author: I'll put in brackets

Reviewer: sure

<kbd>J</kbd> should play the A note. (Yes pianos start at C...)

<kbd>K</kbd> should play the B note.

Remember, you can use [keycode.info](https://keycode.info).

## Making the UI interactive

How will the person know the key they clicked? Let's give them some visual confirmation! We've got each key in a seperate element so let's change the background of the key when it's hit. We can do by adding this line to our `playNote` function:

```javascript
document.getElementById(note).style.background = '#33d6a6';
```

What this does, is it gets the element with the ID of the note variable. If you see above, I set the ID of each `<span>` to be the same as their corresponding note. It then sets the background to be Hack Club Green<sup><strike>TM</strike></sup> or `#33d6a6`.

Run it! What happens?

They keys turn green, but it stays green!!!! NOOOOOO..... We've got to change this, let's add this line of code:

```javascript
setTimeout(() => {document.getElementById(note).style.background = 'white';}, 200);
```

This will return the background to white after 200 milliseconds.

<img src="https://cloud-emjvvdec0.vercel.app/ezgif-6-d255a4b6f60b.gif" width="380" alt="Colour changing keys">

> AND we've done it! Well done my friend, now let's make this a amazing project!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AND we've done it! Well done my friend, now let's make this an amazing project!
```
